FD 1.18.0: Docs updates (not including release notes) (#140)
mulesoft/docs-design-center: modules/ROOT/pages/fd-scatter-gather.adoc

= Run Different Processes in Parallel, then Gather the Results
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]

:imagesdir: ../assets/images

With a Scatter-Gather card, you can send a message through more than one set of cards at a time, collect the results from each set, and pass those results (along with the original message) to the next card in a flow.

.This schematic diagram shows a Scatter-Gather card that includes the minimum of two routes.
image::fd-sg.png[A Scatter-Gather card in a flow]

> <1> Any card can pass messages to a Scatter-Gather card, and this card can be the trigger of the current flow or any other card in the flow.

Reviewer: It cannot be trigger!

Author: @matibenav , the paragraph doesn't say that it can be a trigger. But I'll make the wording more clear.

> <2> The Scatter-Gather card in included in a larger rectangle that is called the _scope_ of the card. Within this scope are two or more sets of card, each set called a _route_. The Scatter-Gather card processes all routes at the same time, and the routes are all independent of each other. Within a route, you can include any card, though it would not make sense to include an HTTP Listener because you don't want to hold up processing while waiting for an HTTP request. Each route can have one or more cards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> The Scatter-Gather card is included in a larger rectangle that is called the _scope_ of the card. Within this scope are two or more sets of a card, each set called a _route_. The Scatter-Gather card processes all routes at the same time and the routes are all independent of each other. Within a route, you can include any card, though it would not make sense to include an HTTP Listener because you don't want to hold up processing while waiting for an HTTP request. Each route can have one or more cards.
```

Reviewer: Since you can't use it as a trigger, you can't use an HTTP Listener. 
You can use an HTTP Request, and it's encouraged to do so.

> <2> The Scatter-Gather card in included in a larger rectangle that is called the _scope_ of the card. Within this scope are two or more sets of card, each set called a _route_. The Scatter-Gather card processes all routes at the same time, and the routes are all independent of each other. Within a route, you can include any card, though it would not make sense to include an HTTP Listener because you don't want to hold up processing while waiting for an HTTP request. Each route can have one or more cards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> The Scatter-Gather card is included in a larger rectangle that is called the _scope_ of the card. Within this scope are two or more sets of a card, each set called a _route_. The Scatter-Gather card processes all routes at the same time and the routes are all independent of each other. Within a route, you can include any card, though it would not make sense to include an HTTP Listener because you don't want to hold up processing while waiting for an HTTP request. Each route can have one or more cards.
```

Reviewer: I have to reinforce this: you are unable to add an HTTP Listener at this stage.

.The *Salesforce Query* field is in the *General* settings.
image::fd-sg-3-sf-query.png[Query and location of the Salesforce Query field]

The message that leaves the Scatter-Gather card has these parts:

----
payload
  0
    payload
      Name
      ID
      Email
  1
    payload
      Name
      ID
      Email
attributes
vars
----

The payload from the Scatter-Gather card consists of two sub-payloads, one payload for each route in the card. The sub-payload under `0` is the payload from the first route in the card, and the sub-payload under `1` is the payload from the second route.

It is possible at this point in the flow to combine the two sub-payloads into a CSV file with a DataWeave script. However, if you would rather not write a DataWeave script, you can concatenate the two sub-payloads into a single payload that you store in a variable, and then map the fields in the single payload to the fields in a CSV file.

The Set Variable card includes 1) a name for the variable and 2) an expression in the *Value* field. The expression (at 3) is this:

----
payload["0"]["payload"] ++ (payload["1"]["payload"])
----

> You can create this expression by dragging the *Custom Expression* pill from the right side of the card into the *Value* field, clicking the arrow in the pill, and clicking *Expand*. Then, drag the first *Payload* pill into the text box, add the two plus signs, then drag the second *Payload* pill into the text field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can create this expression by dragging the *Custom Expression* pill from the right side of the card into the *Value* field, clicking the arrow in the pill, and clicking *Expand*. Then, drag the first *Payload* pill into the text box, add the two plus signs, and then drag the second *Payload* pill into the text field.
```

> .The *Set Variable* card looks like this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.The *Set Variable* card looks like this:
```

image::fd-sg-4-set-variable.png[]

> <1> The name specified for the variable.

Reviewer 2: Because none of these is a complete sentence, we don't need periods. Unless you are going for absolute consistency.

<2> The pill created by dragging *Custom Expression* into the *Value* field.
<3> The expression that concatenates the query results.

The message that the Transform card receives from the Set Variable card contains these parts:

----
payload
  0
    payload
      Name
      ID
      Email
  1
    payload
      Name
      ID
      Email
attributes
vars
  SG_payload
    Name
    ID
    Email
----

The fields that are in the variable `SG_payload` can be mapped to the fields of a custom data type that uses the CSV format:

.You can map the fields of the variable to the fields of the custom data type.
image::fd-sg-5-transform.png[Mapping the fields of the variable to the output]

> <1> The location of the variable in the *Input* pane.

Reviewer 2: ditto

<2> The mappings from the fields in the variable to the fields in the custom data type.

> You drag the `Name` field from the input pane to the `Name` field in the output pane. You do the same for the `ID` and `Email` fields.

Reviewer 2: "Suppose that..."?

----
Name,ID,Email
Rose Gonzalez,0036g000009C4WwAAK,rose@edge.com
Sean Forbes,0036g000009C4WxAAK,sean@edge.com
Lauren Boyle,0036g000009C4X4AAK,lboyle@uog.com
Babara Levy,0036g000009C4X5AAK,b.levy@expressl.net
Josh Davis,0036g000009C4X6AAK,j.davis@expressl.net
Jane Grey,0036g000009C4X7AAK,jane_gray@uoa.edu
Arthur Song,0036g000009C4X8AAK,asong@uog.com
Ashley James,0036g000009C4X9AAK,ajames@uog.com
Tom Ripley,0036g000009C4XAAA0,tripley@uog.com
Liz D'Cruz,0036g000009C4XBAA0,ldcruz@uog.com
Edna Frank,0036g000009C4XCAA0,efrank@genepoint.com
Avi Green,0036g000009C4XDAA0,agreen@uog.com
Alden Macfarlane,0028t000001J3BAB2,a.macfarlane@trundle.org
Tiffani Davalos,0028t000001J3FAH1,t.davalos@trundle.org
Elly Fenley,0028t000001J7JUp9,efenley@tripple.com
Richie Fore,0028t000001J3HKJ0,rfore@tripple.com
Ricarda Cieslak,0028t000001J3WLl9,rcieslak@tripple.com
Rosaria Jorgensen,0028t000001J3BNM0,rosaria.jorgensen@huttrick.com
Treasa Barbeau,0028t000001J3BNk3,treasa.barbeau@huttrick.com
Dwayne Sgro,0028t000001J3EPO2,dsgro@sgroflo.com
Maude Wilber,0028t000001J4UUy4,mwilber@zhipe.com
Lashell Rouleau,0028t000001J3NIK6,lrouleau@zhipe.com

> Agnus Diehm,0028t000001J3TCX8,agnus.diehm@aipail.com

Reviewer 2: Agnes or Angus?

> Pamella Fite,0028t000001J1LOQ3,pamella.fite@aipail.com

Reviewer 2: Two Ls?
Where did you get all these names? LOL

Kennith June,0028t000001J3POI0,kennith.june@aigiant.com
Keiko Woods,0028t000001J3SIL1,k.woods@fiephdom.org
Natashia Horvat,0028t000001J3KSV0,n.horvat@fiephdom.org
Margarita Ptak,0028t000001J3VVe5,ptakm@greelo.com
Delena Hodgdon,0028t000001J3OSQ2,hodgdond@greelo.com
Britt Lafferty,0028t000001J6HUT7,britt.lafferty@hoipolloi.com
Irving Bates,0028t000001J3IUe6,irving.bates@hoipolloi.com

> Merle Cater,0028t000001J3PPl0,merle.cater@hoipolloi.com

Reviewer: These emails look real. :0
If they are, please be sure to put a mock email. Same with the ID

Author: @matibenav , all of the entries where the ID starts with 036g are from the sample data that are in every Salesforce developer account.
All of the other entries I created. I used a random-name generator to come up with names, make up the IDs myself, and made up the company names in all of the email addresses, too.
I have, however, just tested all of the domains that I made up and found 2 that were in fact being used. So, I changed the corresponding email addresses.

----

== Saving Message Data into Variables

If you want a route to act on only part of a message, you can store what you need for the route in a variable before the message reaches the Scatter-Gather card or at the beginning of the route.

> The following configuration is useful if your variables need to be used in more than one route:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following configuration is useful if your variables are used in more than one route:
```

.You can save data in one or more variables that one or more routes can use.
image::fd-sg-alt-1.png[Saving data for use by more than one route]

In this case, the first card in each route receives the same message, which might have these parts if you create two variables before the Scatter-Gather card:

----
payload
attributes
vars
  var1
  var2
----

You can use both variables in both routes, if you need to.

> The following configuration is useful if your variables need to be used only in single routes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following configuration is useful if your variables are used only in single routes:
```

.You can save data in a variable that is used by only one route.
image::fd-sg-alt-2.png[Saving data for use by one route only]

Suppose that you create `var1` at the start of the first route, and you create `var2` at the start of the second route. Then, the second card in the first route receives a message that has these parts:

----
payload
attributes
vars
  var1
----

And the second card in the second route receives a message that has these parts:

----
payload
attributes
vars
  var2
----

> In both of the two previous diagrams, the final card could be a Transform card, which might require you to know how to write scripts in DataWeave, or another Set Variable card that, as in the example about aggregating contacts, combines somehow the results from the routes in the Scatter-Gather card and then passes the variable to another card, such as a Transform card.

Reviewer 2: That is one hefty sentence!

> == Differences between Parallel For-Each, For-Each, and Scatter-Gather

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Differences Between Parallel For-Each, For-Each, and Scatter-Gather
```

For-Each iterates through a collection of elements, processing one element at a time through a single route.

> Parallel For-Each iterates though a collection of elements _n_ times (where _n_ is less than or equal to the number of elements in the collection) with a single process. For example, if there are 10 elements and the maximum number of processes is set to 2, a Parallel For-Each card processes two elements at a time, five times.

Reviewer 2: through
```suggestion
Parallel For-Each iterates through a collection of elements _n_ times (where _n_ is less than or equal to the number of elements in the collection) with a single process. For example, if there are 10 elements and the maximum number of processes is set to 2, a Parallel For-Each card processes two elements at a time, five times.
```

> Scatter Gather runs two or more parallel processes, called _routes_. When all routes are finished, the results from each route are gathered together into a new payload.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Scatter-Gather runs two or more parallel processes, called _routes_. When all routes are finished, the results from each route are gathered into a new payload.
```

== Fields in a Scatter-Gather Card

> Timeout:: The maximum length of time to wait, in milliseconds, for the results from each of the parallel processes to be gathered together into a new payload and sent to the next card. A value of 0 or lower means that there is no timeout. The default value is 9,223,372,036,854,776,000 millisecond, which is the maximum value for a 64-bit float.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Timeout:: The maximum length of time to wait, in milliseconds, for the results from each of the parallel processes to be gathered into a new payload and sent to the next card. A value of 0 or lower means that there is no timeout. The default value is 9,223,372,036,854,776,000 milliseconds, which is the maximum value for a 64-bit float.
```

> 

Reviewer: I would avoid putting the default here.
That value btw is MAX of 64-bit floats. I believe users are not that much interested in that bit, but indicating that it's a 64-bit float may be useful.

Author: @matibenav , the problem is that the default appears in the UI. Users will wonder why.

> Max concurrency:: The maximum number of routes to process in parallel. By default, all of the routes that you create in for an instance of the Scatter-Gather card run in parallel.

Reviewer 2: "in" or "for" but not both

+

> The default value that appears in the card is 2,147,483,647. You do not need to worry about why this is the default. Just understand that, if you don't set the value to the number of routes in the scope of your Scatter-Gather card, the effective value is in fact the number of routes in the scope.

Reviewer 2: Is this the default value in THIS example, or always?
Not sure what the focus of this para is, but if it can be reduced to the following, I recommend it:
```suggestion
Although the default value that appears in the card is 2,147,483,647, but if you don't set the value to the number of routes in the scope of your Scatter-Gather card, the effective value is the number of routes in the scope.
```
So...if you don't set a value, it uses the number of routes instead of the arbitrary default?

+

> If you set this value to 1, Scatter Gather takes the first element in the payload, evaluates it against the condition set up for each route, and sends the element through the route for which it meets the condition. When a route is done processing an element, Scatter Gather evaluates the next element against the routing conditions, continuing until the elements in the payload have all been processed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you set this value to 1, Scatter-Gather takes the first element in the payload, evaluates it against the condition configured for each route, and sends the element through the route for which it meets the condition. When a route is done processing an element, Scatter-Gather evaluates the next element against the routing conditions, continuing until all of the elements in the payload are processed.
```

Reviewer 2: BREAK to appease the Gods of GitHub

> When you configure a Scatter-Gather card, you can, but are not required to, specify values in these fields:

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we have to reiterate the meaning of "can"?
